“AI Trust” is the degree of user’s tendency to trust the AI based on user personal assessment which can be categorized more as emotional / phycological based perspective.  Meanwhile “AI Trustworthy” is the degree of AI reliability based measurement result of standardized and systematic testing methods which examine multiple layer of security layers and aspects of the AI system such as reliabi

lity, safety, security, privacy, accountability.

If the “AI trust” and “AI trustworthiness” concepts are not fully comprehended, it will lead the creation of two major AI trustworthy problems. First is "over trust" situation where people blindly believe on an unsecure AI system just because of personal preferences. In "over trust" situation, people could unconsciously leak confidential information and data to AI system which may lead to some serious data breach problems later. Second is "under trust" situation where an secure and reliable AI system is rejected by the people because it seems not psychological appealing and people lack of confidence. Those situation could lead to serious conceptual confusion in research and policy making which can lead to measures that improve public confidence without improving the system itself, such as branding, pledges, or vague ethics statements. It can also lead to the mistaken belief that achieving trustworthiness is the same as achieving user trust, even though those are different goals and require different interventions.

International standard organization addresses trustworthiness in AI by issuing ISO/IEC TR 24028:2020,  a guidance on identifying and addressing potential vulnerabilities in AI systems by surveying how to establish trust through transparency, explainability, and controllability, and by discussing how to assess and achieve availability, resiliency, reliability, accuracy, safety, security, and privacy. It also notes engineering pitfalls, threats, risks, and mitigation methods.